SELECTION SORT - N^2
we select a position in each pass starting from 0 to n-1.
find the smallest element using two pointers and swap it with the selected element.
now first element is sorted.
select the next position and start finding the smallest element again.

QUICK SORT - best/avg case NLOGN | worst case N^2
choose a pivot element
take i from pivot element searching for elements greater than pivot
take j from the end searching for elements less than or equal to pivot
when i or j find the element they stop and interchange the positions of those elements
continue i and j from those positions only 
when i becomes greater than j that is the pointers cross each other interchange pivot element with j pointer.
now pivot element is in its sorted position.
apply quick sort recursively to the left and right portions of the sorted pivot element.

MERGE SORT - NLOGN
basically merging two sorted arrays that are stored in one array only using the help of auxiliary array- 2way merging
run the loop from 2 to logn times since logn passes happen during merge sort

COUNT SORT - N
take an array named count and its size should be equal to the maximum element present in the given array. initialise it with 0.
increment each index +1 for every occurrence of that number.
traverse the count array from 0 index onwards and start -1 for every occurrence while changing the array.

BIN/BUCKET SORT - N 
take an array named count and its size should be equal to the maximum element present in the given array. initialise them with NULL
traverse the given array and make the bin array point to each occurrence in a singly linked list manner effectively making it an array of linked list.

RADIX SORT - N 
take another array of size 10 bins and initialise them to null 
traverse the given array and take %10 of each element and add them to that digit's bin
take them out similar to bin sort now the bin array is empty
now again add them to the bin based on the second digit of the number that is (x/10)%10
now empty all the bins again
now again add them to the bin based on the third digit of the number that is (x/100)%10
now empty all the bins again now the elements are sorted 
depends on the maximum number of digits.

SHELL SORT - NLOGN OR EQUIVALENT TO N^3/2
used for very large size of lists.
based on the logic of insertion sort.
perform insertion sort with a gap between the elements
gap= n/2 floor value
perform insertion sort
while comparing all the elements at that particular gap are compared one by one till the smallest element is put in the place of of the earliest possible gap
again divide the gap by 2 and floor it
again compare the elements using insertion sort with the new gap value
when gap=1 its the same as insertion sort

HASHING TECHNIQUES
useful for searching
tries to search for keys in less than logn time
values are mapped to keys in the hash table
hashing is done via a hash function that is used to mapp values to their keys
2 keys mapped at same location causes a collission and breaks from ideal one to one into many to one
To fix many to one functions:-
1. Open Hashing 
    we will consume extra space than what is originally provided to us
    eg: Chaining
2. Closed Hashing
    we will utilise only the space provided to us and not increase the space
    eg: Linear Probing , Quadratic Probing , Double Hashing

Chaining
Implemented using array of pointers to linked lists
we are taking extra space to store using pointers and theres no limit to that extra space
loading factor - represented using lambda = n/size (n=no of elements and size=given size of array)
analysis of Hashing is always done based on loading factor
necessary to choose proper hash function

Linear Probing
whenever there is a collission try to store the element at the next free space
may be more than one collissions happening while probing to check for space
take an element get its index using hash function and continue finding that element in a linear fashion until element is found or free space.
loading factor will always be less than 1
but IT SHOULD ALWAYS BE LESS THAN OR EQUAL TO 0.5
after deletion keys need to be moved upwards else itll cause free space and ruin searching
therefore after deletion take out all the keys and enter then in the hash table once again this is known as REHASHING
deletion is not suggested in linear probing

Quadratic Probing
loading factor will always be less than 1
but IT SHOULD ALWAYS BE LESS THAN OR EQUAL TO 0.5
when collission occurs the next position to insert the element is based on Quadratic value ie f(i)= i^2

Double Hashing
Take 2 hash functions
second hash function should have 2 properties:
    it should be able to give the result 0
    it should try to probe all the locations

Hash Functions 
they should allow uniform distribution of elements
1. Mod 
    h(x)= h % size
    size should preferably be a prime no.
2. Midsquare
    take the square of that key and take the middle digit of it 
3. Folding 
    folding the digits of an element by taking a long no and take 2 or more at a time and adding them up 
    useful for strings since they can be folded using ASCII values

GRAPHS
collection of vertices and edges
path is a set of all vertices between 2 vertices
Directed Acyclic Graph DAG - No cycles in the graph whatsoever

Representation of Undirected GRAPHS
1. Adjacency Matrix
    put one on [i][j] if an edge exists 
    if weighted graph given then we can use those weights instead of 1 - cost Adjacency Matrix
2. Adjacency List 
    Array of linked list
    put the vertices in a linked list mapped to that index if theyre connected
    if weighted then store the weight next to the index as well - cost Adjacency list
3. Compact List 
    single dimensional array to represent the graph
    start from 1 index instead of 0
    first v index represent vertices
    leave one empty space after that
    then start entering edges starting from those of vertex 1
    put the starting index of these edges in the block for vertices for each vertex 
    use the empty gap to put the ending point index in it

Representation of Directed GRAPHS
1. Adjacency Matrix
    one is filled only one time that is from i to j
    similarly for Adjacency list as well

Graph without any cycles is a tree.

Breadth First Search
Visiting all adjacent vertices for a given vertex while traversing
done with the help of QUEUE for FIFO structure while visiting and exploring
take out visited vertex from queue and start exploring that vertex
make dotted lines if exploring a vertex leads to an already visited vertex
Queue becomes empty then BFS is completed
given result is called BFS Spanning Tree 
time taken - O(n) but while programming - O(n^2)

Depth First Search
Use STACK instead for LIFO structure
visit a node then explore it
after getting just one other node to explore visit that node and explore it and push the prev node to the STACK
whenever you get a new vertex suspend the old vertex and explore the new one
if we have visited all adjacent or there is no more adjacent then it is completely explores then start going back in the stack and continue exploration
time taken - O(n) but while programming - O(n^2)